The Viking long ships could average 70
to 120 miles a day. They could hit a
place, raid it, drag off whoever they
wanted, and get away before you could
get your army there. That's just
absolutely terrifying.
>> What do you think it felt like for Alen
and the monks to see the Viking ships on
the horizon?
>> Honestly, I think it's the end of the
world. And I don't think they were wrong
to think that. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
says, "The night before Lindesfarn, the
monks saw sheets of lightning in the sky
in the shape of dragons." And this is
obviously meant to foreshadow the dragon
ships coming up. But if you were brave,
then you got taken to the house of the
dead, which was Valhalla. Every day you
would fight and whatever wounds you got
would be magically healed that night and
then the next morning you get up and do
it again. You're essentially practicing
for Ragnarok,
>> the uh the final battle. You know,
there's this poem by Tennyson Ulisses,
my favorite poem. I I think it captures
the Viking spirit. The last line of it
is to strive to seek to find and not to
yield. I think that's very much like the
Viking, you know, my purpose holds to
sail beyond the bass of all the Western
stars until I die. We may die, but I'm
going to do this and I'm not going to
yield.
The following is a conversation with
Lars Brownworth, a historian and author
of many excellent history books,
including The Seawolves, a history of
the Vikings and the Normans: From
Raiders to Kings. He's also the host of
two history podcast series. The first
called 12 Byzantine rulers, the history
of the Byzantine Empire is one of the
first, if not the first ever history
podcast, launched over 20 years ago in
June 2005.
His second series, Norman Centuries,
explores the remarkable rise of the
Normans from Viking raiders to the
rulers of kingdoms stretching from
England to Sicily. In this conversation,
we focus primarily on the Vikings, the
seafaring Norse warriors and explorers
who over a period of just 300 years
reshaped the medieval world and the
trajectory of Western civilization as we
know it. This is the Lex Freedman
podcast. To support it, please check out
our sponsors in the description where
you can also find links to contact me,
ask questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends, here's Lars
Brownworth.
Your writing and podcast take us from
the Vikings to the Normans, the Crusades
to uh the collapse of the East Roman
Empire, also known as the Byzantine
Empire. There's a thread, I think, that
connects the Vikings through all of it.
So, let's start at the beginning. Let's
start with the with the Vikings.
So the age of the Vikings was uh intense
and violent as you write about often
dated from 793 AD to 1066 AD. It lasted
less than three centuries.
So uh the start is often dated to June
8th 793.
What happened on June 8th 793?
In June of 793,
a group of Vikings, probably originating
from Norway, arrived at the Holy Island
of Lindes Farm, which was a monastic
community, and they essentially
slaughtered everyone, uh, burned a
couple of buildings and grabbed
everything that had any value, and left.
That was the first Viking raid that came
in force. And I I do think Lindwar is a
good a good beginning date because the
terror that it brought really signified
what was to come for the next two to
three centuries. So the word of it has
spread like there's a there's a bunch of
accounts like the monk Alquin wrote
about this event in a letter to King Eth
of uh Nithria. Quote, "It is nearly 350
years that we and our fathers have
inhabited this most lovely land, and
never before has such terror appeared in
Britain as we have now suffered from a
pagan race. Nor was it thought that such
an inroad from the sea could be made."
What made this race so psychologically
devastating to this monk and to many
other monks on the island and then to
all of Britain? That's a great quote.
Um, Alquinn was not just a regular
scholar. He was Charlemagne's favorite
scholar. Uh, and he is largely
responsible as much as one person can be
for the Carolyn Gene Renaissance that
had done so much to elevate the early
medieval world. Uh, in fact, the spaces
we have, the punctuation we have, spaces
between words are likely result of
Alwin's work. He was an extremely
literate man and you can you can hear
the terror creeping into that. Um, and
part of that has to do with monastic
communities, the church, uh, and the
what they thought a monastic community
was. So, the church was viewed as a
sacred place. Everyone in Europe,
everyone in quotes, as nominally
Christian, and the church is an area of
safety. It's a literal ark from the
troubles of the world that you can flee
to. I believe there were even rules in
England, for example, that if you had
killed someone, you could flee to a
church. uh and the civil authorities
were not allowed to enter for up to 40
days. So you could have sanctuary there
and to violate this would have been the
worst possible offense you could have
given which is why you know Thomas
Beckett's murder is so so horrible in
England and the monks had dedicated
themselves to a life of studying the
Bible to copying scriptures to to prayer
to removing themselves literally from
the temptations of the world and so they
would seek monasteries that were remote
and the most remote locations you could
find were islands in the North Atlantic
because it's just so difficult to get
there. Um, so the ocean was considered a
place of safety, not sailing on the
ocean, but these these islands were were
literal havens uh of peace and security
and closeness to God. Uh, and so the
fact that the Vikings hit this place of
all places you could hit was the worst
the most terrifying kind of offense uh
against medieval sensibilities. So
there's a kind of line that you
understand you don't cross. Like
everybody agrees. It's the kind of thing
that there's a social contract that most
societies, most civilizations sign.
There's a line that we don't cross. Let
the scholars do their scholarly work.
That's one line. The other line is more
kind of from a military perspective,
from a a mobility perspective, you just
assume the sea is not a place from which
a threat could come,
>> especially the north.
>> Yeah. sort of your conception of the
world is shattered by one the brutality
that can come two that the sea can bring
a threat and three that you don't give a
damn about any of the lines that we as a
society as a Christian society have
established.
>> That's exactly right. I mean even Alon I
think he writes a little later on that
the dead were left as dung in the
streets. So he's describing dead monks
as literal dung in the streets. And you
who would do this to men of God um
inhuman monsters.
>> So who were they uh the Vikings coming
from the north? How did they think uh of
the violence that they were doing?
>> Now that's a very good question because
and it it brings up a central problem of
looking at the Vikings, which is the
story is almost always told from
somebody else's perspective. Um largely
from the pens of those they're
attacking. So they're not going to come
across well. um they're often portrayed
as demonic and and inhuman. The Vikings
themselves though, as much as we can
piece together um from archaeology, from
the stories they wrote later, um that
was another problem. Their written
alphabet, the runes, it was mostly used
for spells, name your sword, things like
that, curse someone, but it wasn't
really useful for writing long poetry or
literature. Um, so the only Norse
literature we have comes at the end of
the age when they had adopted the la the
Latin alphabet. So it's you can almost
never see the Vikings in their own words
as they saw themselves. Um, but we can
piece certain things together. Most
importantly, Viking was not their day
job. Um, they were they were mostly
merchants and farmers. It's mostly
farmers uh who lived in little bays
called Vicks in Old Norse, which is
probably where we get the word Vicking,
Viking from. Um,
one other note about how hard it is to
to tease apart what's happening here is
the the English and the Frankish and the
Irish writers all call them Danes. No
matter where they came from, they didn't
stop to ask, "Now, excuse me. are you
from Norway or are you from So they're
all called Danes or pagans, heathen or
Northmen. Um so this is not very helpful
in figuring out where they came from. Um
the language was interchangeable. You
know, Old Norse was spoken in all three
of those Scandinavian countries. But
living in the north so far up near the
Arctic Circle is that's at the very
limit of where technology of the time
could allow humans to survive. and that
kind of that kind of harsh climate bred
I think very hard people. Mercy was not
equality they seem to favor value. Um
there's a very famous story of a Swedish
Viking putting a sword in the crib of
his newborn son and saying may you have
nothing in this life but what you can
gain with this. I mean, I can't imagine
I can't imagine doing that um you know,
to any of my children, you know, putting
a gun in the crib or
>> you know, I'd be carted away. Um but I
think that kind of underscores the kind
of violent life that was you could
expect as a Viking. I mean, strength was
valued more than anything else.
>> So, understanding the world is harsh and
that strength is the way you you must
face that world. So when you have those
people, especially the ones that self-
select to get on a boat to face the
ocean with all the uncertainty that
results in the kind of brutality that we
got to see,
>> I think so. I mean, the way they would
build their ships, they were
clinkerbuilt, so they were overlaid like
planks overlaying. So they were undecked
as well, and so they have tents. So, can
you imagine crossing the Atlantic, the
northern Atlantic, you know, with these
huge waves splashing over um with an
inch of oak between you and the ocean? I
mean, the amount of bravery that must
have taken to to undergo is astounding.
Plus, they didn't have a compass. They
they navigated by
where's the sun, where are the stars,
what are there birds in the sky, do I
see different color of water, do I see
leaves floating? I mean, it's terrible
for traveling 2,000 mi. that's uh that's
not great. So, it's kind of an
intrepidness to them that
I think is part of the reason why
they're so fascinating to us in our
sanitized more or less sanitized world
that this this incredible courage to to
do this and some horror at what they did
on the other end when they arrived. But,
you know, we'll talk a little bit more
about their religion, but they they do
not view the Christian God in
particularly flattering terms. I mean to
them he's a weak god who won't protect
his adherence and they can just come in
and plunder as they I mean they'll one
Viking famously says on land I'm a
Christian when I'm on the sea I worship
Thor it was very much the kind of
pragmatic take that the Vikings had.
>> Yeah they're gods and they have many but
Odin and Thor are pretty
hardcore gods. So every everything just
their whole philosophy on life is pretty
pretty hardcore. Probably some of the
toughest humans to have ever lived,
>> I think. So yeah, I mean their gods are
horrifying. They're they're
polytheistic. There was no universally
accepted
um head god.
>> I think Marvel has also led people
astray in this. Well, we'll talk more
about um a religion, but since you
mentioned the boats, what what do we
understand about the technology they
were using? Can you just speak a little
bit more to this 1 in of oak idea? So,
these were these long ships
that
uh were also able to travel on rivers.
So they're not like what what is
structurally do we know about the boats
that allow them to be so flexible in
terms of where they can travel?
>> Yeah. I mean, and this was the Vikings
great secret, and I think it's
underappreciated.
They built different types of ships
obviously for different purposes. But
the thing that blows my mind is that
they built these ships that could cross
an ocean, cross the Atlantic Ocean, and
at the same time when they had a draft
of less than 2 feet, so they could sail
up rivers that were 2 feet deep, and if
they came to an, you know, a block or
something, uh, 20 men could pick up the
ship and port it around. They were
incredibly portable. Uh and and their
speed the speed was the most frightening
thing about the Vikings.
>> So the these are the same kind of ship
that they sailed the ocean on.
>> Yeah. I mean it's it's insane.
>> So they're pretty pretty sufficiently
robust to handle the ocean and
sufficiently
mobile to travel uh on rivers and do so
really fast. So you mentioned speed.
That seems to be from a military
perspective the great advantage of the
Vikings because they can move much
faster than the land armies can.
>> Uh so in not just the element of
surprise which they often had but the
element of speed was the thing that gave
them extreme advantage against the
British armies.
>> That was the big one. So, an English
army, if it had access to a good Roman
road that was well-maintained, which
frankly there weren't tons of them, but
they could average something like 10 to
15 miles per day on a good day if they
didn't have a a large baggage train to
slow them down. If you had a calvaryary
unit that didn't have to travel with the
army, they could average about 20 m a
day.
>> The Viking long ships could average 70
to 120 m a day. So, they're just moving
in super fast motion. They could hit a
place, raid it, drag off whoever they
wanted, and get away before you could
get your army there. That's just
absolutely terrifying.
>> What do you think it felt like for
Alquinn and the monks to see the Viking
ships in the horizon? Do you ever think
about try to put yourself in the mind of
those folks and imagining
in that time you don't have a full map
of the world, right? And the oceans are
not mapped and you have a hazy
conception of the world. And so out of
the darkness from the ocean where you
thought nothing can comes
this terrifying this brutal force.
What do you think that felt like?
Honestly, I think it's the end of the
world. And and I don't think that's I
don't think they were wrong to think
that. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says,
"The night before Lindesvarn, the monks
saw sheets of lightning in the sky in
the shape of dragons." And this is
obviously meant to, you know, foreshadow
the dragon ships coming up. I can't
imagine the horror. I would it would
shake my faith, I'm sure, to have these
these giant men jumping out of their
ships with swords raised and your what
do you have you cross? Were the Vikings
aware of the fear that they had caused?
So did they use fear as a kind of weapon
or was this just a
side consequence of their actions or did
they understand and use it? Like the
Mongols, Jenghis Khan, the Mongols used
the fear and the terror on purpose to
increase the chance that they wouldn't
have to avoid fights basically.
>> Yeah. Yeah. The Vikings absolutely used
terror. It was a a main weapon in their
arsenal. They would um they would attack
specifically on high holy days like
Easter, Christmas, because they knew
there'd be higher value targets there
with richer clothing, richer offerings,
and there'd be a lot of money available.
So, they were rather sophisticated,
which I think is something also that
they don't get much credit for. It's
like they were just dumb brutes
attacking and just destroying. Uh but
they were it was very sophistic. They
would show up. This is what I mean when
I say Viking wasn't their their day
jobs. They would be traders in a say an
English port. Kind of looking around.
They'd get everyone's schedule. Then
they would sail away and come back as
Vikings. And they knew exactly where to
go. They knew where all the money was
held. They knew where all the, you know,
the churches were, when to attack, they
knew the entire Christian calendar. They
knew when someone's baptism was, when
someone's confirmation. I mean, they
they were aware of all of this. uh and
they would they would definitely attack
to increase terror.
>> One of the signs of the intelligence
of the Vikings is is that the Viking age
is so short. So what happens is these
explorers and these uh uh rough men who
do the raids, they very quickly are good
at conquering and then start state
building or conquering and then
establishing trade routes and stop being
the quote unquote Vikings.
Basically they just they conquer and
then they start doing the usual
institute build the institution start a
state and now they're normal kind of
nation civilization kind of thing. So
this kind of force that is the
conquering raid violent intense
explorers is like a shortlasting thing a
couple of generations at most.
>> Yeah that's right. I mean the the
Vikings were ultimately a pragmatic
people who if it worked they would keep
it which is frustrating because they
they disappear so quickly uh because of
that
>> with very little trace record with very
little writing.
>> That's right.
>> No time for writing it down.
>> No. Yes. We're not doing that.
>> Yeah. Uh, why were monasteries um
such good targets for these early raids?
>> This is where I imagine myself as a
Viking and um one of my ancestors
perhaps
>> and uh sailing in. I mean, they must
have thought they had won the lottery.
>> Yeah.
>> You got this rich these rich buildings,
rich gold everywhere, decorated books,
jewels, all guarded by old men who don't
know how to fight. You just take it. I
mean we should make clear that the
monasteries had they were used as almost
like storage for for gold.
>> Yeah. And this goes all the way back to
you know the Roman Empire where you know
think of for example the emperor
Augustus when he was writing his will he
put it in the temple of the vestal
virgins as well as Mark Anthony and
Cleopatra. They they'd all done that
because there's this additional
protection of religion and this taboo
against violating that. And the same
thing happened when Europe was
Christianized.
Um, monasteries were placed. I mean,
rich people,
their faith had to be an active faith.
They had they couldn't just say their
prayers and go to church on Sunday. They
would have to do something to publicly
show that they were, you know, worthy of
forgiveness or or whatever. And so, they
would donate huge sums to the the
church. I think you know by the time of
the French Revolution which is obviously
way in the future the church is the
largest single land owner in France. I
mean the monasteries were these these
monasteries filled with monks who had
taken vows of poverty were some of the
richest places in Europe. It's kind of a
strange
dichotomy here.
>> And then we should also say that the
Vikings many of them programmatic
people. So a lot of them would
eventually then convert to Christianity.
So you get you integrate yourself into
the system.
>> That's right. In in some sense, religion
creates this backbone of a society that
stabilizes it. And then you create a
bunch of rules about behavior, how
you're supposed to behave. One of the
rules is you don't mess with the church
buildings and [laughter]
the religious
>> institutions and therefore they become
great storage places for gold.
>> That's right.
>> And then the Vikings here just test the
system.
>> Yeah.
uh I mean it's the the fortune of
geography for them and the fortune of
their way of life uh to be able to raid
to become extremely rich and therefore
this it both spreads the terror across
England and the message across
Scandinavia that there's a lot of riches
to be had and so the raids that's why
there's an explosion of raids.
>> That's right. And I think it's not a
coincidence that it happens when it
does. I mean you have both. So there's
two main theories about why the Viking
age starts. The first, Will Durant puts
it I think the best. He says the
fertility of the Viking women
outstripped the fertility of the Viking
land. It's basically overpopulation.
>> Um and then they're they're searching
for food. And then the second [gasps] is
there's this technological breakthrough
with the keel uh and maybe pressure put
on Charlemagne's consolidation uh and
and a little worries like that. I don't
see why both can't be true. Uh but I do
I do also think Europe like Charlemagne
puts together this vast empire that you
know fairly approximates the Western
Roman Empire. If you squint it looks
like the Western Roman Empire. He's
calling himself um the new Roman
Emperor. Um this will eventually mutate
into the Holy Roman Empire. Uh but it it
it's very much this idea that it's back.
The Roman Empire is back. He's crowned
on Christmas Day in the year 800 and the
empire is back. Uh unfortunately
it was sprawling. It hadn't been thought
through. There was the communication was
terrible. You just couldn't do it. Uh
and so it was wealthy and weak
and that kind of attracts predators by
the time the Vikings crash into it. You
also have the added bonus for them of
really feckless rulers. And we should
say going to perplexity here that
Charlemagne, also known as Charles the
Great, is the Frankish king who became
emperor in 800 and ruled much of the
Western and Central Europe in the late
8th and early 9th centuries. And uh
there's a theory that the Viking age was
also a reaction to the south expanding
north as you're talking about. You tell
the story of Charlemagne weeping because
he foresaw the evil his descendants
would suffer. Did the Franks
accidentally wake the sleeping giant by
crushing the Saxons and removing the
buffer zone between them and the and the
Vikings?
>> I'm sure that had something to do with
it. But yeah, as power was consolidated
throughout specifically central Europe,
um it did put a little pressure on the
areas of Denmark. And those are the
areas that first kind of erupt down
toward
um Norway and Denmark contribute most of
the early Vikings that hit the uh the
Franks. And and the Frankish Empire is
the the most wealthy state in Europe.
It's poured money into religious houses
for the reasons you outlined and all
sitting there easy pickings for people
who've just developed the keel and so
they the word of the raids sent
terrorists through through England and
through Europe.
Uh how much of uh the raids were
reconnaissance and how much was it just
raids and how much is it preparing for
greater scale? That's a good that's a
really good question. I think I think a
lot of the early raids are probing
raids. Let's see what's there. Um
definitely when they're when Ragnar
Lothbrook, for example, sacks Paris in
845,
that definitely results in waves of
Viking attacks throughout the 860s
trying to copy that. And he he actually
is the template which everyone wants to
follow. Uh, and so that provokes
largecale invasions. Um, and they hit
England. They kind of switch off. When
when France is pretty much exhausted,
they switch over to England. Then when
England is pretty much conquered, they
switch back to France. So I think a lot
of these are are just probing raids at
first, but they're proof of concept and
then they come in force. For example,
there was one king in England. His name
was Ethed the Unready, which is a pretty
fun funny [laughter] uh pun on his name.
Uh, but he paid in one year 7.5 million
silver pennies to the Vikings to get
them to go away, which is a bit like
someone's mugging you, so you pay them
more money so they go away. It's
>> that's not going to work.
>> It's not going to work, but it will
bring more muggers.
>> Um, so
he paid the equivalent of 50 adult
elephants, 48,000 pounds of silver to
get the muggers to go away. And it's
unsurprising that throughout the course
of his his reign, he paid something like
20 tons of gold and silver, which he had
to tax his people for.
>> Um, yeah. The Vikings are not the kind
of people that that would make go away,
right?
>> Nope.
>> Yeah. They would just come back on in
force.
>> Yeah. They trust silver to do the work
of swords.
>> Uh, you mentioned Ragnar Lothbrook. Uh,
who was Ragnar Lothbrook? Did he
actually exist? Uh, some people believe
he's a composite from several real 9th
century Viking leaders versus an actual
singular human.
>> Yeah, I'm I'm a romantic. I would like
to believe he existed. Um, I think
probably he's a he's a compilation of of
a lot of different There probably is a
seed of truth there. There probably was
someone named Ragnar. Um, the last name
is a little suspicious. Loathbrook means
uh hairy breaches. He supposedly had
magic pants that would prevent him from
being poisoned by dragons or snakes.
It's maybe a clue we're dealing with
myth here. Um but he is really the
template for for Vikings. You want to
figure out like what the Vikings wanted,
who's their success story. It's Ragnar
Lothbrook. He's born um Norway, Denmark.
Countries argue over that. Um maybe
Sweden. Some some sagas say he's in
Absala. Anyway, he is, you know,
penniless and when he is in his late
teens or early 20s, he decides to invade
sail up the Sen. Uh there is a
well-known city on the Sen uh and he
raids it. Supposedly, he takes the hinge
of one of the gates from Paris to prove
that he's been there. uh the the
Frankish king. I love the Frankish kings
because they their citizens give them
names based on how much they hate them.
So you have you have Charles the Great,
right? Charles the Great, Charlemagne,
who's followed by Lewis the Pious.
That's probably the best one.
>> And Lewis the Pas is followed by Charles
uh the Fat.
>> Who's followed by Charles the Bald.
>> Y
>> who's followed by Charles the Simple or
stupid.
>> Nice. So you can trust the names to give
you the TLDDR of how good of a ruler
there were.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Exactly.
>> So Charles the Great widely acknowledges
sort of one of the great leaders of the
Frankish Empire. Yeah. Aka Charlemagne.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh so what else do we know about him? So
there's um going to perplexity. Ragnar
is portrayed as a Scandinavian warlord
often called a Danish or Swedish king
like you mentioned.
uh active in the 9th century during the
height of the Viking raids
and then descriptions of the raids and
the exploits.
Medieval traditions link Ragnar to
famous raids on the Frankish realms,
especially the attack on Paris in 845
where he
repeatedly sails up the sun and extorts
a huge ransom from King Charles the
Bald.
He's also associated with repeated
attacks on Anglo-Saxon England,
embodying the archetypal Viking
chieftain, charismatic, brutal, and
focused on wealth, fame, and honor in
battle.
So that those are the ideals of the of
the Vikings. Charisma, brutality,
>> and focusing on wealth, fame, and honor,
especially honor and battle.
>> Then also, what does he do with it,
right? What does he do with it? So this
he gets about £7,000 of silver from
Charles the Bald which destroys
essentially destroys Charles the Bald's
kingship but he goes back home to to
Denmark and the Danish king doesn't want
him around because he's too powerful
he's too rich he's a ring giver you know
think Beaolf here right he's he's got
this large personal army which wants to
join him for ad he can do you know
they'll follow him and he is a threat
and so he is he kind of is encouraged to
go elsewhere. He ends up raiding England
for something like 15 years. And then
there's a probably the most famous bit
of the story is he he's shipwrecked and
King Ayella of North umberland captures
him and decides to kill him by throwing
him into a pit with vipers.
>> They throw him in this and the snakes
are biting him, but he's got his hairy
breaches on, so it's not working. So
he's singing a hymn to Odin and he gets
pulled out and he's asked why he's not
dying and he explains rather foolishly
that he has these hairy breaches. So
they take the pants off and throw them
back and his last words are um when the
boar bleeds the piglets come. Uh by
which he means my I have sons. He had 12
of them and they will avenge me and they
do. They lead the uh the great heathen
army um to invade and eventually conquer
England. Ayella, fun fact, not so fun
for him, is the supposedly was captured
by the son of Ragnar. His name is Ivar
the Boneless, which is somewhat
terrifying of a name. Uh and he is he's
the first person that a blood eagle was
performed on.
>> What's the blood eagle?
>> It's when they remove the lungs. They
while you're still alive, they cut you
open and remove the lungs and put the
lungs on your back.
>> And then when you try to breathe, they
flutter like wings. So it's called like
an eagle. It's called the blood eagle.
>> That is
>> disgusting. Yes.
>> And this is what Ayella, you know,
deserves according to, you know, Bejorn
Ironside and Ivar the boneless, the sons
of Ragnar. Like this is what they get.
This is the the piglets coming
>> to the old boore, you know.
Uh one one last thing about our um about
Ragnar
>> is his wife is also an important part.
He had something like 12 sons. The
accounts differ and probably three
marriages but his most famous wife was
named Olog
and she fell in love with him. He was on
a ship. He was passing through. So kind
of a glamorous sea king, right, with his
he's the he's living the dream. and she
sees him and she wants to be married to
him and he he says no. He says cuz he
wants a clever wife. And so he says if
you can accomplish these three things
you can marry me. So tomorrow I'll be
here tonight and then tomorrow I want
you to come to my ship. I want you um
to have no clothes on
>> but not be naked. I want you to have not
eaten a meal but not have fasted. and I
want you to come without a companion but
not alone.
And so she shows up with a dog. She
doesn't have a companion, but she's not
alone. She's taken a bite out of an
onion, so she's eaten. She hasn't
fasted, but she hasn't had a meal.
>> Mhm.
>> And then she has very long hair, and so
she's using the hair to cover herself.
So she
>> naked, but she's
>> but clothed.
>> Right. Wow.
>> So in this So this is kind of the
cleverness that would be expected of a
of a Viking woman. So they're well
matched. They're like the ideal couple
>> and then they have 12 kids. 12 sons. Not
just 12 kids, 12 sons.
>> And many of them end up
>> many of them end up almost as famous as
their father.
>> Ivor the boneless.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh Buer and Ironside and many others.
These sons later appear as leaders of
major Viking forces in England,
particularly the so-called great heathen
army that invades in 865.
>> And they are historical. Um, they are I
mean there's no these were the names of
Vikings who attacked and conquered
England. They end up attacking Islamic
Spain. They go all over Europe.
>> Well, for them it sounds like glory in
battle is really important.
>> That's right. Yeah.
>> So, it's not even It's just part of the
culture. It's part the the honor
culture.
>> Men die, but uh names live forever. Uh,
as a small aside, since Ragnar is the
star of the Vikings TV series, I don't
know if you've gotten a chance to watch
any of it. Uh, is there any accuracy to
it? I think it's well done. My one
quibble,
Ragnar's brother is Rolo in the show,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> They weren't brothers. In fact, by some
accounts, they were born 80 years apart.
Um, but as a storytelling device, I
applaud that.
>> Yeah. They basically take all the main
Vikings and put them all together and
just
>> I get it. I get it. It's confusing
honestly in writing a book about it. The
hardest part was coming up with an
organizational scheme. Like what's
what's the overarching thing that links
them together?
>> Well, there there's certainly an
overarching thing, but we don't have
information about it. This is the
problem is we get uh to see just slivers
of information right from the raids.
There's there might be just this rich
history that we know nothing about.
Yeah.
>> Like where did this warrior culture come
from?
>> Like what was the evolution of these of
these ideas of honor in battle? I mean,
maybe it's being overly romantic, but
you can imagine the ideals
of battle from the Roman Empire, from
the from the Roman Republic and the
early imperial period
coming up north to Scandinavia, and we
just know very little traces about that.
>> Yeah, even the name Scandinavia is is
from a Roman author.
>> I mean, I mean, they thought it was an
island. They thought Scandinavia was an
island with one tribe, the Scandia
tribe. But, you know, it's close enough.
[laughter]
>> And uh who who was the what wasn't this
great heathen army that invaded England
in 865? What can we say about that?
>> Well, there's this famous scene in the
Viking siege of Paris in 845, which is
really the Europeans's introduction or
Europe as a whole to a Viking army, not
just a raid. uh and then what it could
do. And the king, the emperor Charles
said, you know, let's find out what they
want and how much do I have to pay to
get them to leave. And so his ambassador
went to a Viking and said, who is your
king? And the Viking looked at him,
didn't understand, and he he said, "We
have no king. We are all kings." So they
were very like decentralized,
tough. They only valued leaders who
could prove that they had they had won,
you know, could give out the rings.
>> So flat organization, very meritocratic.
>> Yes.
>> If you're good at what you do, you
demonstrate that skill in battle, that
means you get to have uh maybe a
leadership position. And the moment
you're no longer effective, you don't
get to have this leadership position.
We're all kings. That's gangster.
They're all history. The Mongols, Jenis
Khan was famous for this.
meritocracy.
>> That's right. Yeah,
>> that's one of the components of an
extremely effective military force is if
meritocracy
it is uh prized. Same is true for who
gets through rule. How do you determine
the succession? If you're just giving it
to your oldest son, that's going to be a
problem.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I could not agree more.
There are some problems with
with meritocracy and civil war because
it tends to the only way you can find
out like Alexander the Great, right? Who
does your empire belong to to the
strongest? What kind of guarantees the
civil war at least with giving it to
your older son, you know, who's going to
be there's an element of stability
there. Um although you may end up with a
Caligula,
uh more likely than not, you're going to
end up with a Caligula. I would say
human nature being what it is. Um,
>> it's it's [laughter] a
>> Yeah. Yeah. It always converges to the
and the holds power.
>> The crazy
>> Uh, so yeah, great heathen army 865.
>> So the great heathen army, they were war
bands that each followed this guy and
this guy and I'm going to sit you down
in this room. I'm going to tell you my
plan. You're going to listen. You're
going to push back. I'm going to push
back and we'll just have this kind of
creative discussion and come up with a
plan we all agree on. So it used to be
relatively small Viking groups that are
doing raids,
>> right?
>> And then the great heathen army is this
large coalition of Viking groups without
a real leader
>> that was able to somehow stabilize
enough to have something like
governance.
>> Yeah.
>> Basically, there seems to be a very
rapid evolution of a Viking in every
part of the world they touch. You go
explorer
>> Mhm.
uh raid, conquer,
establish state.
>> Yeah. Uh and trade routes and always
maintaining an a grand ambition
but no longer doing the violence and
always being sufficiently programmatic
and flexible where you can accept accept
uh conversion to Christianity for
example if it's useful
>> and then accept the culture, accept the
language. So that's why they integrate
and the thing that we think of as Viking
dis kind of dissipates and disappears
pretty quickly.
>> Yeah. And I think the best example of
this is France, right? So the Vikings,
this is we'll talk about this more
probably with with Rolo, but you know
the Vikings settle in France in the
north man's duche which is shortened to
Normandy and they within a generation I
mean Rolo whose real name is is Ralph
Eric um he names his son William.
That's not a Viking name. And within a
generation the language is gone. The
Viking names are gone. The worship of
Odin is is, as far as we can tell, gone.
And the Normans are building churches
and marrying into the local aristocracy.
And they're they're essentially their
Vikingness is gone except for one thing,
their like incredible vitality, which
the Normans essentially conquered
kingdoms at both ends of Europe, Sicily
and uh England, and found two of the
four most powerful states in medieval
Europe.
>> Yeah. So the ambition is there, the
vitality is there,
>> the methods have changed.
>> Yeah. And they change rapidly which is
fascinating.
>> So you have a book, you have a podcast
series on uh the Normans. So let's talk
about Rolo. Who was Rolo? Uh the famous
Viking war leader who became the first
ruler of Normandy, northern France.
Well, first I should say as someone of
Norwegian descent, I'm going to fall
down on the Norwegian side of the
argument here because [laughter]
Norway and Denmark almost came to blows
over which was the birthplace of Rolo,
>> but the consensus seems to be Norway,
not just biased.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so he was
>> the only thing we the only glimpse we
get of Rolo as a young man is he was
very tall. So he's called Ralph Walker,
Ralph Granger because he was so tall he
couldn't ride the little Viking ponies.
Uh so he had to walk everywhere.
>> Um but [snorts]
kind of poor uh probably raised on
stories of Ragnar and and the other
Viking lords. and he goes uh he may have
participated in some of the earlier like
the 860 raids that they they the Vikings
did on Paris or the Sen, you know, and
then he eventually ends up plundering
the what will become the Norman coast.
And in the in the year 911,
he makes a treaty, the treaty of St.
Clarispt with uh the Frankish king
Charles the simple uh which is not
stupid. It's it's more like
straightforward. There's no guile in how
he talks. Uh and
>> Charles makes a really interesting deal
with Rolo, which is um why don't you
settle here, integrate into the local
aristocracy, and defend the norm the
French coast against the Vikings, which
I don't know. It's like putting a
burglar in charge of your security or I
don't know, but it works.
>> Mhm.
>> It works. Um, and Rolo, by the time he
makes that deal, he's probably in his
mid 50s to mid60s. It's it's unclear
when he was born, but the point is he's
lived the Viking life. Um, he's he's got
something like 20 or 30, if you add up
all the sagas, they say he they gave him
this many coins or whatever, he has
probably 20 or 30 tons of silver that he
has acquired and then probably given out
to whatever. So,
>> so yeah. So he's done the full raid
>> and then the conquering and then
>> and then the king says can you settle
here? Can I give you legitimacy?
>> So he does the diplomacy of a treaty.
>> Yeah.
>> Then he does the the good state craft
and state building and then becomes I
mean European.
>> Yeah.
>> In one life you go through the full
journey.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And then his son William
Longord succeeded him and uh
>> gets assassinated but he does enlarge
Normandy. So basically every ruler after
Rolo enlarges Normandy until it it
essentially becomes more powerful than
the than the king um by far. There's a
wonderful scene when when Rolo uh signs
the treaty, he becomes a leisel lord of
the French king. And there's this great
scene because Rolo has to bend down and
kiss the foot of the king. So Rolo is
probably, you know, he's a Norwegian
Viking. He's probably, I don't know, 6
foot.
>> Mhm.
>> Charles, this little Frank, he's
probably 510.
He's like roll is towering over him and
he's there's a large both armies are
watching. There's a bunch of people who
have come in from the countryside.
They've heard something's going on and
this important part of this feudal
ceremony you have to kiss your lord's
foot to to you know be in a subservient
role. And Rolo says I'm not going to do
that. So he turns to one of his guards
and says you kiss the foot. And the
guard's probably taller than he is. So
he bends down and he picks the king's
foot up to [laughter] his mouth,
>> which the way to do it.
>> Charles goes falling on the back. I
mean, I can't think of a better example
of the relationship between the Norman
Dukes and the French kings. I [laughter]
mean, it's perfect. It's perfect.
>> Oh god, I love the Vikings.
>> Yeah.
>> So, as you've covered, and maybe you
could speak to that a bit more, for a
long time to come, Normans have
influence on Europe and beyond. Yeah,
it's hard to overstate
Normandy's impact on Europe uh in the
Middle Ages.
Of course, they will they'll go on to
conquer England as well. Um but Rolo
when he is when the he signs the treaty,
it's an ambiguous treaty. He's not he's
given a title um which is rather
ambiguous. He's not a duke and it's not
clear. He's not an earl. He's not a
duke. He's just subservient to the king.
And which means Normandy is not a duche.
It's not a principality. It's kind of
this ambiguous. No one really knows what
it is. And so Rolo being a good Viking
and his descendants being good Vikings
despite becoming French. Um they just
call themselves Duke.
>> Mhm.
>> And they they they essentially seize
whatever power they want. Um there's one
Norman Duke. I think he's the grandson
of Rolo. He's kidnapped by the French
king when he's 14. He escapes the
captivity and kidnaps the king as a as a
14-year-old. I mean, it's these are
these guys are crazy. How far
geographically and in time does the
influence of the Normans and Normandy
go? So, what should we understand about
the impact of Normans in history? I'm a
romantic, so I I when I read history, I
usually end up rooting for the losers.
Um I want Harold Godwinson to beat
William the Conqueror, you know, I want
Hector to beat Achilles. Never works no
matter how many times I read it. But I
was always interested in the Normans uh
because of the Norman conquest of
England. And my I have a twin brother
and he asked me, we were taking a walk
and he asked me [gasps]
how did Europe uh because we I was
reading about the dark ages at the time,
the the early middle ages. How did
Europe, this kind of backwards place,
become the dominant
>> force in the world? [sighs] And I I
started thinking about that and my
answer really is the Normans. The
Normans that that's the great change
between Europe as a backwards
inward-looking place and Europe as a
kind of confident outward-looking place.
And that change happens uh under under
the Normans. I mean the Normans, it's
not a coincidence that they they lead
the charge in the first crusade.
Um they create the state of England. Uh
if you look at England before the
Vikings arrive, there are seven it's the
heptar. There are seven kingdoms in
England and the Vikings destroyed all
but one. Only Wessex is preserved and
they've conquered about half of Wessex.
And there's a young king. What's he
going to do? Mhm.
>> But that king is Alfred the Great and he
conquers the rest. And then his grandson
Ethleston is the first man called King
of England, King of all angles. Um, and
then they do they do the same thing
almost wherever they go. They they help
create modern France by ripping apart uh
Charlemagne's empire, which was
unwieldy. It looked good on paper, but
it was unwieldy. It was replaced by this
leaner, meaner, compact thing. They
figure out how to deal with the Vikings
by essentially building fortified
bridges. Um, changes to their army and
so forth. The Vikings, I I like to call
it creative destruction. It they by
destroying the things they destroyed,
they cleared the ground for something
stronger to grow.
>> Uh, that's brilliant. The the creative
destruction engine that created Europe
was the Normans and the Vikings.
And then you also you have another book
that talks about the Byzantine Empire.
So you have the creative destruction
that resulted in Europe that uh Europe
led to this western quote unquote
civilization that we think of now. And
the thing that protected Europe for
centuries was the existence of the
Byzantine Empire, the East Roman Empire
because of all the threats
uh that came towards Europe. This strong
uh stable empire that is the Byzantine
Empire protected the forces from
everything that came from the east.
>> Yeah.
>> They were a buffer. they were a buffer
giving Europe this kind of vital time to
develop the way it needed to develop.
>> It's interesting to think
that the world as we see now was a
results of of a sequence of quite lucky
geographical and
leadership decisions in history. I mean
it really does pivot on uh
a few points of geography and a few
special leaders.
>> Yeah.
>> That conquer.
>> Yeah. Had Constantine chosen his sight a
little less wisely, the world's going to
be very different.
>> Yes. So, Constantine is the guy who
moved the capital of the empire from
Rome to Constantinople,
thereby giving a lot more focus to the
east, thereby protecting
Europe from the the gigantic threats
that loomed in the east.
>> That's right. and the Islamic invasions
of the 7th century, they couldn't get
past that choke point of Constantinople.
They had to take the long way across
Africa, you know, and by the time they
get to Spain uh and conquer Spain and
into at the Battle of Tour, you know,
Charles Martell is able to stop them and
they're they're massively overextended.
You know, I think it's a very different
story if they can come in through the
Black Sea.
>> And all the times the East Roman Empire
almost died from all the invasions,
all of those invaders would have just
just conquered the entirety of Europe.
>> Yeah. I mean, I don't think they would
have met much resistance.
>> Yeah. So, rewinding back, what was the
religion, the religious beliefs, the
gods that the Vikings believed that
we've mentioned a little bit of Thor and
Odin? How did they see this this world
and the universe?
>> So, the Viking gods are are I mean,
they've been sanitized, but they're
they're they're quite terrifying, but at
the b their basic conception of the
universe is an eternal struggle between
chaos and order, which chaos will
eventually win. So I think the best view
of cosmology is of concentric circles
with Utgard is the outer realm and
that's where the chaos is and those were
the that's where the frost giants are.
All the monsters that seek to destroy
the gods represent order and stability
and the monsters represent chaos and
it's it's an eternal war between the two
of them. Um so there are different
categories of gods depending on which
circle you come from. The gods don't all
like each other. They don't they're not
sometimes they engage in wars. Um some
of the most famous gods the Norse gods
you know Loki or Freya come from outside
the aier the main gods. So it was kind
of a fluid it was kind of a fluid thing.
>> It was more a way to understand the
world
>> I think. So yeah the thunder is Thor
fighting the ice giants and and that's
what that is. Uh going to perplexity,
Vikings followed a polytheistic ritual
heavy religion centered on a pantheon of
gods and spirits with no single holy
book or unified church and practices
varied a lot by region and family. And
so the major gods was Odin and Thor and
Freya.
Odin was his domain was war, kingship,
wisdom, death. Thor was protection,
thunder, fertility. Freya was love,
magic, battle dead.
Um,
typical worshippers for Odin were
chieftains and elite warriors and poets.
Typical worshippers for Thor were
farmers and quote ordinary people. And
typical worshippers of Freya were women,
magic practitioners, and lovers.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I've heard it. I
think you can break it down saying like
Odin was the elite. He's kind of more
aristocratic, right? He he's the god of
poetry. You need to read, etc. Only the
elite would know how to do that. A
farmer wouldn't really care about that.
Where Thor is a more earthy god. You
know, you want the waves to be less, you
know, pray to Thor.
>> Um, I find Odin, I think, most
disturbing. He's the god of madness and
the god of poetry, which I guess those
are related.
>> Yeah. Um, but in battle, I mean, the
berserkers, probably the most famous
type of Viking warriors, were considered
to be Odin's chosen warriors. They would
show no pain and they just run at the
enemy and attack with their nails and
their teeth.
>> Even if they could have their arms
hacked off, they would still keep going
like uh they would and they would attack
other Vikings. They would just they were
berserk. It's where we get the word
from.
>> What do we understand the mindset that
leads to that? I mean, it wasn't it
wasn't religious in nature. There's not
uh this kind of ideology. It's just a
way of life and and then prized honor
and intensity in battle.
>> Yeah. I mean, one of Odin's names is the
raven feeder. I mean, you by creating
corpses, which ravens feed on, you are
you're doing the work of Odin. And you
know, the the the Viking view of the
afterlife was
unique.
There weren't really punishments,
not really, for doing bad things. Uh,
unless you did something really bad. Uh,
then you ended up as basically an evil
spirit, uh, haunting your grave. Uh, but
if you were brave, then you got taken to
the house of the dead, which was
Valhalla, uh, to and you were
resurrected. Every day you would fight
and whatever wounds you got would be
magically healed that night and then the
next morning you'd get up and do it
again. You're essentially practicing for
Ragnarok
>> the uh the final battle.
>> Uh which you would lose. So I'm not
sure. It seems it's rather pessimistic.
>> The battle is what I mean it sounds like
losing is not a thing. The battle itself
is what matters. So Valhalla is a place
where you fight a battle every day.
>> Every day. unlimited food. There's like
a boar or whatever this and there's
unlimited wine.
>> Yep.
>> And you can die as much as you want.
You'll reborn again. And this is the
idea of the
>> This is the idea of the highest. This I
guess
>> if there's such a thing as heaven in
this kinds of construction of the
universe. This is heaven. This is the
highest form.
>> This is the highest place you can go to
is Valhalla. Yeah. Is fight every day.
>> Eat as much as you want. Drink as much
as you want, die, and are reborn the
next day. Ends for
>> forever preparing yourself for the final
battle of Ragnarok.
>> Ragnarok.
>> So, this is where this is the end of the
world. This the cataclysm.
>> That's right. Odin's going to die.
>> U Thor will die. He'll get killed by one
of Loki's children, the Midgard Serpent.
>> Um Odin will be devoured by a wolf.
uh the the sun and moon which are being
chased by monsters by giants will be
caught and swallowed by the giants
plunging the world into eternal
darkness. Um
essentially all the all the gods will
die and darkness and chaos will then
ensue and then at the very end the this
is mostly from a guy named Snory Sterles
who was living right at the end of the
Viking age and writing this and he was I
believe a Christian. So there's I think
we're fusing things here. So then there
would be a new earth and a new heaven
and a new god
>> who's all powerful.
>> Yeah. If you think of religion as a as a
kind of technology, a social technology
that stabilizes or um helps guide the
evolution of a society. It's interesting
to see what the Vikings came up with.
And do you ever think from a history the
grand view of history how effective
these different technologies of religion
have been? Yeah, I mean I think that's
certainly I'm thinking of of the Viking
rituals. Hospitality is very important
in a northern climate where you know
food is scarce, winters are long and
harsh and if if you don't share what
your hearth with,
you know, someone knocking on your door
then someone else might not share it
with you. You could be facing death. So
in this case, hospitality becomes a core
belief. And
>> you know, the idea was that Odin would
travel incognito
knocking on people's doors and he would
remember if you let him in or not. And
if you were hospitable, he would bless
you. And if you were unhospitable, he
would murder you. And
>> you know, I think these rituals are
obviously intended for
how do we survive this winter?
>> How do we effectively spread the message
that hospitality is pretty
>> good thing? and is carrot in the stick
of religion.
>> Yeah.
>> If you do a good thing, you'll be uh
rewarded. If you do a bad thing, you'll
be punished. And then different
religions plays a different ways of
communicating that.
>> Yeah. I mean, I I think also religion
gives you it gives you a worldview,
right? It gives you a morality and uh
these are these are core parts of
society. And the the beautiful thing
about religion
is it uh interplays with human nature
and it guides humans. But then of course
human nature and humans project
themselves onto the rel religion.
Sometimes they use that religion. It's
um to accomplish goals in a pragmatic
sense, in a political sense, in a
geopolitical sense, in a military sense,
in a social sense. And so there's that
dance of uh
how religion invigorates and guides the
peoples and then how the peoples use the
religion
>> to guide the direction of the world.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's certainly the history of
Christianity has a big role to play in
the history of Europe, the history of
the Byzantine Empire and that part of
the world. And it was an incredibly
effective religion. uh once uh
Constantine converted it spread
extremely quickly relatively speaking
across a couple of centuries just to
linger on the Viking views of the world
and the afterlife. So we mentioned
Valhalla there's the Norns which are the
three spirits that represent the past
the present and the uh the necessity
they spin the fates of all men and gods
at the roots of drizzle.
>> Yeah. Drizzle.
>> Ddrizzle.
>> Yeah. So there there's a notion of like
determinism and fate to the Viking life.
And there's Valhalla, there's hell,
>> Nithlehem.
>> Yeah.
>> This was the destination for the vast
majority of people. So if you don't make
it to Valhalla,
>> this is where you go. Unless you're a
real bad person, then there's some
punishment for the truly wicked.
>> And we should point out that hell,
spelled with one L, uh was a daughter of
Loki.
>> Mhm. uh and was not the same as the
>> hell with the two L's.
>> Hell with the two L's. Very different.
>> It's it's more like purgatory type of
situation.
>> Yes. This house of like the house of the
death, the house of the underworld,
>> a colorless twilight, not necessarily a
place of punishment, but simply the
inevitable end for most, unless you end
up in Valhalla, which means you're a
great warrior dying in battle. It
reminds me of the Greek view of the
afterlife, right? where you essentially
get amnesia and forget who you are
unless someone makes a sacrifice and
says your name and only then you'll
remember it. So your your destiny is
ultimately to
just become gray and fade away. So you
might as well you might as well be
brave. You might as well run at that
spear.
>> So that was the engine of uh their the
the
warrior culture that was core to their
society. I think probably
>> I have to ask about Vikings as
explorers. They were truly one of the
greatest explorers in history.
>> What can you say to what is it in their
spirit that motivated them? I mean they
sailed they reached North America 500
years before Columbus. They sailed
uh obviously to England, Spain, Italy,
Russia, North Africa, the Middle East,
Paris. And I'm just showing here a map
of the ocean roots and the river systems
that they connected to and sailed. What
do you think drove them to explore the
unknown? This boggles my mind. This like
this map here just that messes with me
cuz they they didn't have a compass.
>> I mean, can you imagine shoving off from
some fjord in Norway West? That's your
only west. Mhm. And there was a Viking
named Nad. He's actually the first
Norseman to reach Iceland, though it was
a total accident. But here's the here's
the mind-blowing part. He decides to
land and explore. And he gets off and he
sees two humans. [gasps]
They're monks from Ireland.
>> Mhm.
>> They [clears throat] got there in a
canoe. Now, look at Ireland. Look at
Iceland. That's even more impressive.
They got in a canoe, a skinboat,
>> and they just went north because they
were trying to get away from the world.
Yeah,
>> they found Iceland and in a very
excellent move on their part, they ran
away as soon as the Vikings arrived,
which is, you know, pretty smart.
>> I don't know if you know, there's this
uh video of the deranged penguin
with the Warner Herszog documentary
where
Warner Herszog is like uh overdubbing
explaining the thinking of the penguin,
but the penguin leaves the tribe and he
just goes out into the mountains. I have
to show you this video. This is my
favorite video of all time. There's this
lowkey uh documentary
where they're talking about penguins and
then there's one penguin
that leaves
>> I'm out.
>> Leaves the tribe and just goes towards
the mountains and as Warner Herszog says
towards certain death. It always reminds
me of this kind of Viking spirit or the
or the monk spirit. There's something
one human or a small group of humans
just decide to go
>> just go
>> and not look back.
>> Are there sea monsters out there? Maybe.
>> Maybe.
>> Is there any land? Are we going to fall
off the edge of the earth? Maybe.
>> And just as Warner Herszok says, you
know, this certain death. Now, he
doesn't romanticize it. He says the
penguin is just deranged and crazy. But
look, the penguin did look back briefly,
>> right?
>> And he he did think about this. So this
there's there's two ways. There's
multiple ways, but you just highlighted
two ways to explore. One is cuz you're
this hardcore dude that just is looking
to raid and just goes and goes and just
you have the resilience and the will
>> to keep going. And then there's the the
monks that just want to
>> leave. Yeah.
>> Versus go toward their they want to
leave far away so they could be closer
to God. they could be closer to
themselves and
>> and away from sin. Yeah.
>> You know, there's this poem by Tennyson
Ulisses, my favorite poem. I think it
captures the Viking spirit. The last
line of it is to strive to seek to find
and not to yield. I think that's very
much like the Viking, you know, my
purpose holds to sail beyond the bass of
all the Western stars until I die. We
may die, but I'm going to do this. I'm
not going to yield. That spirit is one
of my favorite aspects of human beings.
I think that's why the Vikings remain so
popular today. You know, we name our
satellites, our football teams, you
know, our cruise ships. There's this
like there's this romantic hook
>> Mhm.
>> of a people who did not yield.
>> Yeah. They embody the part, the flame
that burns in all of us that we admire
most about human beings
is is that like
unyielding focus
on
going out there of of taking the leap
into the unknown, into the scary, and
never stopping.
>> It's not too late to seek a newer world.
>> I have to ask you about speaking of a
newer world, America. [laughter]
Yes. And uh Leaf Ericson. But first, a
quick bathroom break if it's okay. Quick
30 second thank you to our sponsors.
Check them out in the description. It
really is the best way to support this
podcast. Go to lexfreedman.com/sponsors.
We got Lariden for measuring AI adoption
in your business, BetterHelp for mental
health, Element for Electrolytes, Finn
for customer service AI agents, Shopify
for selling stuff online, and Perplexity
for curiositydriven
knowledge exploration. Choose wisely, my
friends. And now back to my conversation
with Lars Brownworth.
All right, we're back. Let's talk about
this incredible fact of the Vikings that
Leaf Ericson who was a Viking explorer
was the first European to reach North
America around the year 1000 5 centuries
before Columbus reached North America.
Um tell tell the story of his journey.
What do we know about him? So let's
begin with his dad. Uh, his dad's name
is Eric the Red, who was forced to flee
Norway when he was probably 10 years old
because his dad had killed some people.
It's kind of hilarious. In the in the
saga, it says for a few killings.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. I guess that's a thing. Um, so he
went to Iceland and he got a farm in
Iceland which was already starting to
become overpop populated. They had cut
down all the trees. There were some
climate problems of deforestation and
farms just blowing away. So, the
population was essentially beginning to
crash in Iceland
and he got into a fight with his
neighbor uh and ended up killing his
neighbor and so he was exiled from
Iceland. He was exiled from the place
his father had been exiled from.
>> So, it runs in the family this whole
outlaw thing. What also ran in the
family apparently was this streak, this
courageous streak. Uh, and he had heard
that there had been people. So the the
Norwegian Vikings, they were aiming for
England and they hit the Hebdes, which
are these kind of treeless islands above
Scotland and they found they were good
for refueling. Get pick up water or
whatever and then on your way to
Scotland to raid. Uh, and then a Viking
had missed the Hebdes and discovered
Iceland. And then another Viking had
aimed for Iceland, missed and hit
Greenland. And a little fun fact about
Greenland, it is both north, south,
east, and west of Iceland. So it's any
direction you're going to hit Greenland.
>> So Greenland is uh hard to miss. It's
hard to miss, which is not to take away
anything from the extraordinary danger,
the certain death of going further west,
but there was this by this time there
was this idea that, you know, enough
people had become famous by sailing west
into the unknown and discovering things
that I think there was a general idea of
there's more out there to the west. Uh,
and so he had talked to someone who had
seen Greenland and reported that there
was this good land further west. Uh, and
so he hired the ship's crew of that
Viking. So it's kind of the deck was
loaded and he went to Greenland where he
was able to settle uh two different
colonies. One was called the Western
Settlement in the West and one was
called the Eastern Settlement and
essentially the extreme south. And that
was essentially the edges of where
Viking technology could be. A cool
factoid is that the Vikings practiced
husbandry, raised animals, and obviously
this is not an option in Greenland,
although they couldn't have known it at
the time, but they brought plants with
them. So, and then they were able to
trade with the the native Inuit for
walrus blubber and things like that, and
they they made a go of it. But what's
obvious, you know, anyone who's seen
Greenland, there's there no trees. It's
almost impossible to survive by
practicing husbandry. It is impossible
to survive as it turns out just
practicing husbandry. And by this point,
I think this extraordinary Viking
pragmatism is beginning to be played out
u because one of the reasons the
Greenland experiment fails ultimately in
300 years uh is they fail to adapt. Um
it's clearly they should they should
focus more on fishing on other sources
um than than just raising pigs and cows.
But
>> well, so we hit the the limit of the the
Viking adaptability which they have
demonstrated throughout the world
actually.
>> Yeah.
>> Interesting.
>> So Eric the Red is this he makes his
name by exploring and he does in fact
once he discovers Greenland he calls it
green. He says there's so many salmon in
the rivers of in the fjords that you can
just scoop them out with your hands. You
don't even have to fish.
>> Well, is this real?
>> Is a lie.
>> That's not true at all. So, he's doing
propaganda.
>> Is this story true that he called it
green just so he can attract people?
>> It is the greatest real estate scam in
history. [laughter]
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Genius. Um I mean it stuck to this
day.
>> Yeah. It's the most misnamed place in
the world.
>> Yeah. But but in the Europe of the time,
even in Iceland, like the the dream was
to have land. I mean, land equal wealth
in Europe. And here he says there's
enough land for the taking like anyone
who wants, which is true. It's the
largest island on Earth. I mean, there
it's unusable, but it should be called
Iceland, glacier [snorts] land or
something. But it worked. He took 500
men with him from Iceland. It's got to
be a significant chunk of the
population, but there's enough people
kind of land hungry. There's no more
room in Iceland. It's too restrictive.
We're going to go further west. Um, so
he takes 25 ships and then 14 make it,
which is pretty good. Um, and then those
those 14 ships with their 300
or so people start the western colony.
And then word gets back to Norway, but
Norway's 2,000 mi away, 2,000 plus miles
away. So it's, you know, contact they're
they're having to get resupplied.
Obvious in the first winter all their
cattle die. It's not a great it's not a
great start for uh people who practice
husbandry. Uh so they've got to get
resupplied from Norway. But you know,
the chances of making it to Norway and
back are actually not that great if
you're sailing without a compass. You're
just kind of hoping.
>> But they do it. They do it. And the
colonies survive until the 1400s
uh where they just go silent.
>> So let's talk about Eric the Red's son,
Leaf Ericson. How does the journey
continue west?
>> So Eric uh is getting a little older.
The Greenland settlements are becoming
filled up. Eric is happy where he is.
He's been kicked out of enough places.
He's made his home here and this is
where he wants to be. But his son,
they're running out of resources.
There's no wood. um you know there's
limited food etc etc. Uh and so his son
proposes going west because he's heard
stories that there are there are other
lands. So another Viking had gotten lost
aimed for Greenland and mist and had
seen something. He said he saw clouds
and mountains and there's there's land
there and then he had turned around and
Leif again did the same thing. He hired
the man's crew.
>> He asked his dad to come. His dad
wouldn't. He went with his halfsister
Freighus who was a whole another story
by herself and a bunch of other
colonists and they went and they landed
in a place um he called it Vinland
because he found things that he could
ferment. So of course the Vikings they
made wine or wine-like alcohol. So, Le
Fericen is he's landed he doesn't know
this, but he's landed on a new continent
um with essentially inexhaustible stores
of food and um timber and everything he
needs. It's the perfect place.
Unfortunately for him, it's also
inhabited um by some natives, probably
the Alangquin tribe. Uh he calls them
the scrailings, which is just Norse for
screechers because he can't understand
their language. they just yell at them
and and attack immediately. Um they stay
there for 3 years and then give up and
go back home. So ultimately and then
really don't tell anyone about it. They
just keep it in their northern sagas.
>> Why do you think they left? Why do you
think they didn't stick around longer?
>> I think there are a number of things
working against them. Of course, I would
like to believe there's an alternate
history where the Vikings successfully
make it down, you know, maybe down to
Maryland or something. And there's a
alternate history of the US and Canada
here. But I think there's a number of
things working against them. Uh the
first is they stubbornly refuse to give
up husbandries. They're trying to make
this work. Um Lanso Meadows, I think is
where they were in Newf Finland. It
doesn't work. Uh the climate's too cold.
It's not the grasses aren't appropriate.
You know, it's just not going to work.
And they they do not adapt. Number one.
Number two, they're 2,000 plus miles
away from Norway and getting resupplied.
And although they are extremely good
sailors and explorers and traders, I
think this is a little too far. And then
thirdly is the native resistance. It's
just too incessant. They are they are
outnumbered, you know, millions to one
>> and the Alangquin do not want them
there. It's clear and they're not going
to stop attacking.
>> It's so fascinating because they really
didn't understand
the full scale of the land they've
encountered. Right.
>> That's right. That's right. I mean, had
they known had he known
>> what he had found
>> that there's more south? Maybe they
their intuition was like there's not
>> it's just all northern land. It's void
of resources. We can't do the whole
husbandry thing. Yeah,
>> but you would think they could go down
the coast.
>> I mean, if they could have gotten enough
uh people from Norway, you know, or or
Iceland or whatever, you know, a sizable
enough colony and build some kind of
defenses to fight off the incessant
attacks, then I think
>> that's a different story cuz there
certainly the resources are all there.
>> Mhm.
>> Or just keep staying on the water, keep
going down the coast, not necessarily
camp out until
>> until you get further south. It is
fascinating to think about that
alternate history where they would have
uh discovered America and settled there.
So this is 500 years before Columbus.
There's
first of all they could have done a lot
of the stuff we think about the European
nations doing including brutality
towards the natives but there could have
been a coexistence also and uh some of
the diseases that come with them could
have done the damage that they did uh
500 years later but now
it would have stabilized the populations
to where in the European ans the fo the
Spanish and so on will come the natives
would be more ready. So they would the
Europe would then encounter a sizable
population of the Viking descendants and
the natives to where the the two could
hold on to the land and bring a
different kind of civilization there
because ultimately Europe with the
European ways the west of the western
civilization expanded out into North
America.
But there could be this whole
Scandinavian vibe.
>> Yeah.
>> That would have taken over.
>> Just a hair's breath. My favorite museum
in New York is called the Closters. Um
it's part of the Met. And in the
Cloysters, there's an ivory cross.
And the Ivory Cross has been richly
carved with Christian scenes. It was
carved in England, but it's made of
walrus ivory.
And they got it from the new world and
the Viking, you know, Viking traders. So
it represents, you know, the great arc
of the northern trade. So it's walrus
ivory from the new world via Norway to
England to New York. It's a great symbol
of that trade. This whole just period of
thousands of years of exploration
that we no longer can do. So kind of
geographic exploration of the world is
fascinating. It takes true courage. It
takes true wander
>> uh of the kind of exploration we could
do now is more in the scientific realm,
the realm of ideas and then maybe in
terms of geography out into space and
exploring the universe.
>> Yeah. I think the closest analog is
probably Mars, right? I mean, what would
it take for you to be like, "All right,
I'm going to leave. I'm going to go to
Mars. You're you're never coming back.
there's nothing there as far as you know
you know all the accutraments of
civilization are not there it's that's
the kind of courage you would have taken
>> yeah but there's on top of that with
Greenland with Iceland with Vinland
there's just so much uncertainty like
literally what's beyond this hill so
with Mars everything is mapped so so
it's really you you understand the full
harshness of the situation
>> what you're going to face
>> so it's more it's uh that's more akin to
like all right I'm running an
ultramarathon. I understand the
challenge.
I think more akin would be like
traveling out into
like the or cloud like beyond the solar
system.
>> What's scarier? The known or the
unknown?
>> I [snorts] think that deeply the human
nature pulls us towards the unknown.
>> That's true. Yeah.
>> All right. Speaking of which, going to
the east.
Uh so like we mentioned the Vikings
really went all over and one of the
directions they went that ended up
touching the Byzantine Empire and
Constantinople is they went east. What
can we say about the 8th century journey
east in the river networks that uh the
Vikings did the Swedish Vikings the
Vangians
as they began to explore the river
systems of Russia. So this was the most
surprising part for me when I was first
thinking about writing the book and you
know discovering where the the Vikings
went. I never in a million years it
would have never occurred to me that the
Vikings went east. Um but a good way to
think of this is the Vikings launch
themselves in whatever direction their
country is facing. So Sweden goes to the
east, Denmark goes down toward Germany
and Norway goes England and the new
world. So there's a Viking named Rurick
who goes east
and manages to set up an encampment on
this lake called Stara Ladaga which is a
launch pad to both the Vulga River, the
Neber River.
>> Yeah. And these are major river systems
in the east that take you all the way
down to the Black Sea and the Caspian
Sea. Because the Vikings, you know, such
seaborn people, they can sail up rivers.
This allows them access to the
caliphates in the east uh and to the
Byzantine Empire where they being
Vikings immediately decide to attack the
city. The Byzantines essentially set the
Sea of Mara outside of Constantinople on
fire
>> and burn up all the Viking ships. So
then the Vikings decide, okay, we can't
we can't take Constantinople, so we
might as well join them if we can't beat
him. And they end up as
probably the most famous guard in
Byzantine history, the Verangian Guard.
Verangian means the men of the oath,
>> the men who swore sworn an oath. This is
kind of an analog of the Pritorian guard
in ancient Rome. Uh they were famously
loyal to the throne, but not necessarily
to the person sitting on the throne. Um
they're major power players. the last of
the great Byzantine emperors, Basil the
Bulgar Slayer, um forms them in the late
900s and they're they're there with the
history all the way up until the end of
it. In fact, many of our famous Vikings,
Harold Hardrada, uh serve in the ranking
guard. If you go to Constantinople
today, inside the church of the eye of
Sophia on the second floor there's a
marble balcony and on the railings you
can find Norse runes that are carved in
by ranging guards who were bored during
a particularly long sermon in a language
they didn't understand but they had to
stand there. So that's a fascinating
thing which is the Vangan guard guarding
the emperor of the East Roman Empire is
made up initially for quite a bit of
time of Vikings.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean I mean like speaking of
pragmatic they just integrate into
everything.
>> Yeah.
>> Now eventually the guard um became less
and less Viking over time.
>> Yeah. But this whole you fast forwarded
the story we should mention that uh Star
Laduga in 753 AD is when it was
established opening the connection to
the two rivers and they began trading on
the rivers and establishing
more stable states along the rivers
including the Kiev and Roose in 86282
where the Vangians so it's the Swedish
Vikings they took Nograd they took Kiev
and they established the Kievan Roose
there and that is what led to the
connection to the Byzantine Empire where
they started to again the Vikings went
from being Vikings they go through this
process of trading
and then establishing a state now
they're doing treaties of different
kinds and they're also waging
uh or trying to to wage war and going
all the way to Constantinople and having
a deep admiration for Constantinople
enough to then begin to dream of sacking
Constantinople.
>> Yeah. I mean, once they're alerted to
the the wealth that's there, you know,
Vikings being Vikings, they uh they show
up.
>> Can you speak to the Greek fire? So,
this was 941 and 944
when they tried and then Greek fire was
this technology developed by the Romans.
We don't really know what it was Greek
fire. It was a form of napal obviously.
Uh we have the ingredients what made it
up napa and oil and things like that.
But it was this very flammable material
that uh would ignite on contact. So uh
the Byzantines would fill it into clay
pots and then throw the clay pots. As
soon as it's exposed to oxygen, it would
start burning. They also had siphons.
They would carry like flamethrowers on
their back and they would just spray it
at uh enemies. And the the really
devious thing about it is that if you
launched this clay pot at a ship and the
material, you know, pulled across the
wood and then dripped off into the water
being oil, it would float on top of the
water and continue to burn. So that if
you were a sailor and you jumped off the
ship cuz it's on fire and jumped into
this oil patch that's on fire, you'd be
coated with it and you you'd burn
underneath the water. Uh it was a
horrible way to go. So this was a state
secret, closely guarded secret. So
closely guarded it remains a mystery to
this day of what exactly it was,
>> which is incredible. Right.
>> Yeah. But it in in the 944 attack on
Constantinople, I mean, the Vikings are
coming on their ships. They brought
these ships from Sweden. I mean, that's
crazy. They're in the Black Sea. They've
sailed and they kind of swarm at the
Byzantines. The Byzantines launch a
bunch of decrepit old ships toward them
that have Greek fire on them and and
that turns the tide. But the Byzantine
emperor so appreciates the strength of
these horrifying Vikings that he forms a
bodyguard of them.
>> And hence we get just a few years later
again tried to sack Constantinople and
then join him. They
>> join him the Vangian guards in 988 with
Basil and Vladimir. They make ranking
guard into an institution and then the
word of mouth spreads that this is a
real career path for the uh for the
Viking is to join the guard.
>> Yeah, that's right. Cuz not only do you
do you get paid very you get compensated
very well obviously for defending the
emperor particularly if you do a good
job but you also have opportunities
because the emperor sends you let's go
attack you know this tribe and you get
to keep whatever you take. So there's
tremendous amounts of war profiteering
you can accomplish. And the other great
river system, the vulga that brings you
to the the great enemy of the
Byzantines, the Abbassad caliphate. Uh
and they had a lot of trading links with
the north. Um so you get things like fur
and amber. Um lots of slaves from the uh
from the Islamic world going up. You
even have in a Swedish coin horde
there's a Buddha that's been found. I
mean
in Sweden.
>> Yeah. So these networks of trade mean
how incredible are they with geography,
right? You can transform your
understanding of land from the geography
of the land to the geography of the
river networks because the way they raid
and then invade and then conquer England
is through the rivers. It's an
incredibly different way of seeing the
world.
>> Yeah. And if you look at the kingdoms
the Vikings created and I'm thinking
particularly of like Eric Blood axe uh
in you know in York
he's controlling parts of Ireland uh
parts of Scotland Wales England like
there's no that doesn't make sense
unless unless you're a Viking you know
these that also added tremendously to
the terror that the Vikings brought
because I mean you should probably be a
little careful with absolute statements
here. But I can't think of a major
European city that's not on a river.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh which meant now with the Vikings
because they could travel up, you know,
rivers, that's a shallow rivers and then
carry their boats whenever they would
>> everything was on the table now. Even
hundreds of miles inland
>> is on the table
>> at an incredible speed, much faster than
the land armies. It's terrifying. You're
living in a constant state of fear.
>> Constant state of fear. We've talked
about this transition
in several different contexts, but uh
you've written about this. It's really
interesting. Is the Vikings like Ragnar
going from this mode of sea kings with
no territory to the mode of land kings?
>> You have like somebody like Harold
Bluetooth, 10th century Viking, king of
Denmark. You go from being these grand
explorers that are free to being state
builders. Was this always inevitable for
all of these Vikings? Could we speak to
the different translations maybe in
England?
>> I think in one way it's inevitable.
There are so many examples of destroyers
who just wreck civilizations.
The builders are much more rare, you
know. So I I think it's it's one of the
reasons I think Augustus is a much more
interesting person than Julius Caesar is
Augustus was a builder and I like to see
that. I like to see not just can you
pull down but can you build up you know
just to take Ireland for example Dublin
Limmerick almost every major city in
Ireland was founded by the Vikings.
So I I don't think it's just a given
that it would have happened. I think
there's something about the Vikings. And
it's probably tied to their pragmatism.
They're like this pragmatic streak of
we're going to use whatever. Oh, this
system of king works. This taxation
system is pretty good. Let's keep it,
you know, oh, this is this doesn't work.
Let's let's ditch it.
>> Yeah. They I mean that they went from
destroyer to builder very naturally and
very quickly.
>> Yeah. There's a natural process from
from conquering to building. But it does
take talent and it does take a certain
something.
>> Can we uh talk about one of the great
Vikings, uh Canute the Great.
>> I love Canute. I love Canute. I I think
he never he doesn't get his due. He's
one of those unsung heroes, I think, of
the Viking world. Uh he had a
reputation. He was called the emperor of
the north. Uh he had this massive, you
know, England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland,
Norway, Sweden, Denmark. I mean just
tying it all together.
Um, he was an extremely effective
English king. I believe he introduced
the penny sadly. Discontinued, but I I
>> Wait, really?
>> Discontinued. They're no longer making
>> pennies discontinued.
>> 2025 is the last the last penny.
>> Oh, no.
>> Everything's going to go up by five.
Uh, so going to perplexity, Canude the
Great was an early 11th century Danish
ruler who became king of England,
Denmark, and Norway, creating what
historians call the North Sea Empire.
He's often regarded as one of the most
effective kings in Anglo-Saxon English
history for stabilizing the realm after
decades of Viking warfare. Again, an
example of a destroyer becoming state
builder. Yeah. Uh he was he was
extremely strong. He was effective. You
know, England went from being the
whipping boy of the Vikings to
controlling the Vikings
>> and ended up on a pilgrimage to Rome.
>> Went to Rome. So yeah,
>> he uh although a Viking war leader, Ku
ruled as a Christian king
>> uh patronizing churches and monasteries
and going on pilgrimage to Rome in 1027
where he attended the Holy Roman
Emperor's coronation.
>> Yes, he was recognized by his
contemporaries as something special,
right? You don't get invited to those
coronations if you're a nobody. Uh but
the most famous story of Canute
that I know, my favorite story is, you
know, being in positions of power, being
famous, a lot of people sucking up to
you, a lot of people telling you
whatever they think you want to hear.
And so people are telling him all the
time how wonderful he is. And he takes
his whole court down to the seashore and
orders his his courters to carry him on
his throne into the water. And then he
commands the seas to stop, the waves to
stop and to retreat.
>> And they don't obviously. And everyone
thinks he's little. But his point is
that you're all saying how great I am. I
have no control. I mean, this is this
act of humility to kind of embarrass. I
have no control over anything. Stop
telling me I'm the greatest thing since
sliced bread.
>> I I like the leaders and there's a few
of them in history that rise to the very
top and they're still able to maintain
humility.
>> Yeah. Marcus Aurelius is uh in in the
Roman Empire is an example of that. You
know, reading meditations is also just
an insight into the mind of a man who's
to himself cuz meditations is uh not
supposed to be work that's published.
It's just a diary,
>> right?
>> To himself is deeply humbled
and
>> Yeah.
>> And one of the most powerful humans in
history
>> Yep.
>> is still humble. the two most famous
Stoics. One was an emperor and one was a
slave.
>> So in the other part of the world,
you've written a book and you did an a
legendary podcast series on the
Byzantine Empire, the East Roman Empire,
aka the Roman Empire. Uh well, let me
actually just, this is tangent of a
tangent, ask you about the podcast. So
you're you've created what is widely
considered to be the first history
podcast. This is before Dan Carlin,
before all the amazing podcasts we all
know and love. Uh so the podcast series
of course is the 12 Byzantine rulers,
the history of the Byzantine Empire.
What motivated you to explore this
medium of podcasting? What in the in the
early supposed 2005 something like this?
>> It was 05. Yeah. And people should go
listen to it because it it's still I
mean it's like it's like we're talking
about like ancient times or something
because it is now a long time ago but
it's still an incredibly good podcast.
It's a great podcast series.
>> Thank you. At the time there's a series
that I would get at the library called
The Great Courses.
>> I don't know if you're familiar but
great. There was one particular uh
professor, his name is Bob Brier, and he
was he's an Egyptologist, lives on Long
Island,
>> um where I'm from, and he
he's a massive thing. It's like 24 hours
of lectures about the entire history of
Egypt. And it was fascinating because
you he's such a good storyteller.
And I I was reading as a kid, I could
never figure out if I liked the medieval
period better or the Roman period
better. who's constantly going back and
forth and I stumbled across a book which
referred to the medieval Roman Empire
and you it was a bit like discovering
your favorite TV show had 12 extra
seasons you didn't know about
>> and they were just as good.
>> Um so I I it was really was a labor of
love. I couldn't I I would not shut up
about the Byzantine Empire. So my my
older brother, we would go on walks
together and I would be like, and then
Justinian, you know, [gasps]
>> and he stopped me. He said, "I have no
idea what you're talking about. I have
no idea. Like, I need a framework. Give
me a framework for this." So I went home
and I recorded myself
giving a framework, uh, which turned out
to be episode one. But, um, I I think I
I said it I did it in a British accent,
a really bad British accent. I was just
messing around. And I gave him the
luckily I did it in my regular voice as
well as this goofy accent and I gave it
to him and then I forgot about it. And
that summer
I was on a dig in Petra um excavating
the Temple of the Winged Lions which was
like a dream come true for me. And I get
this email from my brother and he said,
"Oh, I just submitted it as a podcast."
So he had to tell me what that was. Mhm.
>> But I was going for, to the extent that
I had put thought into it, I was going
for kind of a a longer form
lecture great course series on the
Byzantines.
>> Mhm.
>> Um, and then a bunch of people started
emailing me saying, "When's episode two
coming?" Oh, okay. So, I guess there has
to be an episode two. [clears throat]
>> And then the thing kind of snowballed
from there. I had no idea what I was
doing.
>> Uh, your brother, by the way, is super
techsavvy.
>> He is. It wouldn't have happened without
without Anders. So Andre, thank you.
>> But like looking back now, what do you
think what do you think about that
medium? Why why do you think it
connected so much
to people? Because you've also written
uh several amazing books. One of them is
on the on the Byzantine Empire. Just
looking back in a retrospective kind of
way cuz that from there blew up an
entire industry of incredible other
history podcasts and podcasts in
general. Yeah, I've been I've been
that's a that's a great question. I've
been trying to think for the past 20
years like why it's such a
such a niche field, right? Why would
people be interested in it? Um, I think
number one, it's a great story and
people are people and we haven't changed
much, which is one of the reasons why
it's accessible because it's very these
are people you could meet today. Um,
but I think podcasting in general
because there's such a low bar to get in
or there was at the time. I mean, there
was nobody else. So just by virtue of
being first, you know, it attracted
attention. Um, whatever its merits,
being first was the the strongest one.
Which to say, you also did another
series on the Normans
who no longer had the benefit of being
first and was still nevertheless very
good. So
>> Oh, I appreciate that. Thank you. I
there's But I think podcasting in a way
democratizes
learning. Um, you know, it it unlocked
the potential of all these armchair
historians.
I'm one of them. Uh who's like, "Hey,
this is really cool. I'm passionate
about this." You know, anything that
that allows you to tap into your
passion,
you know, I think is going to be is
going to be great.
>> And the Byzantine Empire is an
interesting one. I don't understand
maybe uh and and then you articulated
this well, but it doesn't get like the
love that it maybe deserves in history.
I think the the framing of the book you
wrote uh on the topic it's the reason we
have western civilization as we know or
Europeanbased western civilization in a
sense because you have they let's see
maybe you can articulate the different
ways they they connected the thread but
one of them is they preserved the
knowledge when the when the west was
when Europe was going through a dark
period they protected Europe in all
those ways
>> and then eventually they they jumpst
start the renaissance because people are
Constantinople is going to fall. It's
inevitable. It's surrounded by hostile
powers. And so they start migrating uh
to Italy.
>> Mhm.
>> Um just at the moment, Italy is
receptive to its Greco Roman past. Uh
Greek had died out in the in the west.
actually as early as uh the time of
Justinian in the uh 500s 560s
they needed if you wanted to travel
between the eastern and western parts of
the empire you needed you know guide
books with helpful Latin or Greek
phrases. Uh so Latin had died out in the
east and Greek had died out in the west
by the 14th century. So you needed
Byzantine teachers to be able to read
Plato and Aristotle. The book also
emphasizes and as we've mentioned a kind
of great man view of history. So
celebrating people like Constantine
Justinian or Justinian who would be your
number one top emperor in the history of
the East Roman Empire, Byzantine Empire.
>> That's a good question. I mean
romantically it's got to be Justinian.
Uh he dreams big. He dreams big. He
doesn't always get there but he dreams
big. He he dreamed and tried to
reconquer
the Western Roman Empire. I mean, he was
a lot of wars of conquest.
>> Yeah.
>> And built the
>> built the Sophia. I mean, I think this
is, you know, we we're interested in the
Egyptians
because they built the pyramids. We're
not interested in the pyramids because
they were built by the Egyptians, right?
It's like what is the great thing that
your society has created? And I think
the is Sophia is that for the Byzantine
Empire. I mean to go in it today is
still the closest you can come to the
fifth century,
>> you know, and [clears throat] it peel
back the imperial splendor of what it
must have been like. You know, you can
still see it, you can smell it, you can
feel it like it's there.
>> There's actually a really nice video on
YouTube of you going from I think 50 to
60 years ago. I don't know.
>> Seems like that. It does seem like that.
Yeah, we actually were kicked out. My
brother and I went.
>> What did you do?
>> Well, you [laughter] know, they, as you
know, they're very strict uh as to
guides. They want to promote the local
economy, so you have to have a a local
guide. You can't go in there and look
like you're being a tour guide if
without a license. 15 different
organizations. So, we went there early
the the hour it opened and we had the
entire cathedral to ourselves. And so we
went around and my brother's holding
this camera and I'm, you know, goofily
pointing things out. Uh, and one of the
guards noticed us and, [sighs and gasps]
you know, we had to remove ourselves
from the building.
>> And so one of the things I mean,
Justinian was a critical person in this
too. He overhauled the Roman law.
the the the legal system, the law. First
of all, the Roman Empire in general, the
East Roman Empire propagated it. They
believed in the law. They held on to the
law.
>> That's right.
>> And that's many of the legal ideas we
take for granted is grounded in
everything developing the Roman Empire
and stabilizing the Roman Empire. So,
they they carried that flag forward.
>> Yeah. I mean outside of Great Britain,
all European legal systems are based on
ultimately based on the code of
Justinian and then weirdly because of
the French connections the state of
Louisiana. You actually if you want to
be a lawyer you have to you have to pass
a different bar in Louisiana than in
everywhere else in the US.
>> Uh why do you think the the Western
Roman Empire and then the Eastern Roman
Empire collapsed? Just looking at the
grand picture of the history of the
Roman Empire's 2200 years starting from
the kingdom to the republic
to the imperial period to the East Roman
Empire period. Why do societies rise and
fall?
>> That's a really interesting question and
there are probably as many answers as
there are different kingdoms. Um but
just the the Roman Empire,
my take on it is that the collapse
really starts at the end of the reign of
Basil II. So the years 10:25,
uh Basil is the last monarch of the
Macedonian
dynasty, which had seen the empire
become the most powerful uh state in the
Mediterranean, much more powerful and
advanced than its Muslim or Christian
neighbors. Um he had expanded the empire
essentially as large as it was going to
be after Justinian.
It was wealthy. It was glittering. He
was educated. I mean corders had to
memorize the works of Plato by heart.
The emperor one of his favorite
activities was to go and he would begin
a quote and you would have to finish it.
But you didn't know where he would begin
or what he was thinking that day. This
was kind of what amused him. So they're
incredibly literate. I mean inside
Constantinople itself the literacy rate
was close to 100 which is
>> Mhm.
>> crazy. But when he died the court which
had been this magnificent court this
bureaucracy which had been running the
empire and which is vital to the
workings of the empire they convinced
themselves that they could run the
empire. They didn't actually need the
emperor. And so they specifically
selected weak rulers and then that led
directly to the disastrous battle of
Manzacert in 1071 where the Turks enter
the story and defeat destroy the Roman
army under Romanus Dioynes who's
attempting to break free of the bure
bureaucratic constraints and then
Anatolia gets flooded by these nomadic
warriors and the Byzantine gets pushed
out of them. that once they've lost the
heartland, they've lost their source of
troops, they've lost their source of
taxation, they've s lost their source of
food. At this point, it's impossible to
recover. And the crusades are an
attempt, the first crusade anyway, is an
attempt by the Eastern Emperor Alexius
to recover Asia Minor more than
Jerusalem. He wants to recover a Asia
Minor and obviously doesn't work out. Uh
so I think at that point it's on a
trajectory that can only end in
collapse. And I think that's you can see
that same kind of thing in the Viking
world that we talked about this
staltifying
bureaucratic
this inflexibility
>> combined with the growing threats from
all directions.
>> Growing threats in all directions. Maybe
your own success is beginning to be a
problem
>> and you can't adapt as quickly. You're
not as lean and mean anymore. It's too
many traditions, too many too much. The
weight of history breaks you.
>> You sort of mentioned the Macedonian
period, the the dynasty where it's the
East Roman Empire flourish once again,
but like they've gone through so many
periods like that and they lasted.
>> That is true. I don't know what the
reason is, but you can really
trace the Roman spirit, the Roman state,
the core of whatever that is through
that 2200 year period. There's a real
connection, a thread that connects all
of it. And [snorts] so that there's
lessons. That's why we do need to study
the Byzantine Empire for lessons of what
makes societies last.
>> Yeah. Yeah, eventually everything
collapses, but like that one lasted
>> long time.
>> It's easier to last when you're hidden
away somewhere, but they were in the
middle of everything. Everybody wanted
what they had.
>> They were getting [snorts] hit on all
sides. There was in their entire 2200
year history, there was not a single
year they were at peace on all
frontiers.
>> And it wasn't always because they're
they're looking for trouble. A lot of it
was as defensive.
>> Yep. Including with those pesky Normans.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. Yeah.
Uh on the topic of uh great manner
history. So where do you land on this
great debate? How important are
individual humans versus systems? So
what do you think turns the ties of
history? Can individuals,
rulers or individual warriors or
individual humans have the power to
change the course of history?
>> Yeah, that's the question, isn't it? I
The short answer is I I I subscribe to
the great man or great woman theory. Um
I think there's moments I I can't
imagine the Protestant reformation. I
don't think you can just swap out Martin
Luther and have a Protestant
Reformation. I don't think you can swap
out Augustus and have the Roman Empire.
I mean there I don't think you can swap
out and so on and so forth.
I think ultimately these impersonal
forces are insufficient for explaining
because we are people, we are humans, we
are, you know, we everything is kind of
a relational thing. Uh, and but at the
same time, you know, the moment needs
the man, but the man also needs the
moment.
>> Some of it is timing, some of it is the
s the the the environment, the system
around it. But yeah, I just seen so many
incredible humans
that uh persevere through things that
would break basically everybody. And
they the the power of the belief they
have. We [snorts] were talking offline
about Napoleon. Here's a guy who was a
student of all the great military
generals of the past. extremely
competent in being able to micromanage
every aspect of military affairs of a
nation, but also extremely confident
in his vision of the world and ability
to conquer anyone. And you have the same
thing with Jenghask Khan.
This this boy that came from nothing
that everything was taken away
uh
united all of Mongolia and then
conquered most of the known world to
them,
including eventually China. [snorts] And
it's like, well, can you possibly have
the great the great Mongol Empire
without Jenghis Khan?
>> No.
>> Yeah. And this in the same and we as
Americans ask ourselves that question
about the founders. I mean, George
Washington, not to romanticize it, but
to give away power symbolically
is a is a really powerful statement.
Like we mentioned with Augustus,
there there's when somebody's given
power and in some sense absolute power,
what they do with that power can
reverberate through generations and
that's in the hands of an individual.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's exactly right. It's
well put. You know, Catus in ancient
Rome, same thing.
>> [snorts]
>> What lessons from, this is a big
ridiculous question. What lessons from
all the things we've talked about the
exploration of the Vikings? What lessons
do you learn from Vikings?
>> Lessons lessons to learn from the Viking
age.
>> By the way, I should mention one thing.
It's a very practical lesson uh that we
didn't talk about that you taught me is
the the Vikings were like groomed
themselves.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah.
>> They were like clean. This is so very
surprising to me
>> that they like washed themselves and
then both the men and the women
>> Yeah.
>> really took care of themselves. You
don't often think about that. There was
this whole like the Vikings, everyone at
the everyone has this very clear picture
of what a Viking looked like and also
>> has no idea what a Viking looked like
somehow at the same time like almost
everything about them is wrong that we
think of you know almost everything
about it is wrong. They they didn't wear
horned helmets. Mhm.
>> Um
they their hair probably was blonde
disproportionately, but that was more
because they used lie to dye it because
it would kill the lice. And then they
would take baths on a more regular
basis. I mean, this depended on where
you were. So in England, for example,
they were mocked as being soft, which
always blows my mind. Like really,
you're going to mock the Vikings for
being soft because they took too many
baths. Mhm.
>> But then in the Muslim East, uh, one
Muslim traveler writes that they were
God's filthiest creatures because of
their habits of
kind of disgusting shared bathing.
>> Well, that aspect of it. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> So, it's not that they didn't bathe,
they bathed a little too much and
together.
>> They bathed, but they also like would
>> brush their teeth using like recycled
water, like they then spit into a cup
and pass it to the next guy. It was It's
not awesome. I read that uh this is this
could be propaganda, but I read that in
England
there was worry that the Vikings were a
bit too attractive to the women of
England because because of how much the
Vikings took care of themselves in terms
of grooming.
>> Yeah. In the Dane Law, like
>> you get invaded by these people kicking
your rear end militarily. And now
they're stealing your women just to
insult you as well, you know.
>> Yeah, they're [laughter]
they wash themselves daily.
>> Yeah,
>> they've got got good teeth
>> whether they need it or not. I know.
[laughter]
>> Well, you guys can't have everything.
>> Yeah.
>> What are you doing anyway?
[clears throat]
So, yeah. So, one of the lessons I think
we need to draw is shower daily.
>> Shower daily.
>> Yeah. There you go.
>> That's right.
>> That's that's the
>> that's the lesson. That's the takeaway.
That's the big profound takeaway. Is
there is there something bigger about
the exploration about the leaps into the
unknown?
>> Yeah, I think like a couple years ago
there were all these debates about
statues. Should we pull these statues
down? This person did a bad thing. Let's
pull these statues, you know, and and I
always thought they were kind of silly
to I mean, I understand the point, but
like we don't when you have a statue of
Christopher Columbus, for example,
you're not glorifying every single thing
the man ever did and all the bad stuff
that comes from this or that. you're
honoring something about him, like the
spirit it takes to cross an ocean, not
knowing what's on the other side. And
and that's that spirit of exploration. I
think with the Vikings, it's the same.
There's this way you you approach the
world, this fearless, pragmatic
approach. Uh I think as an American too,
it's the ultimate it's the ultimate rags
to rich. It's the myth we tell
ourselves. You know, the man who starts
with nothing and ends up as a sea king.
well respected and sung about by poets.
I mean, that's that's it right there.
You know, this is
and when you're when you're a society
and you stop doing this, you run into
trouble as well.
>> Uh what about the the Byzantine Empire?
What lessons you draw from them?
>> This is a much that's a much bigger one.
>> Thousand-y [clears throat] year history.
>> Thousand-y year history. And it's also
what I I think is so cool about the
Byzantines is that in the ways that they
are like us and the way that they are
unlike us
>> in some ways they're very analogous to
the United States. The kind of the
polygot nature of their inhabitants, you
know, the their roots, the Greco Roman
Judeo-Christian roots. [gasps]
Um, and yet
it was a place of incredible alien
[clears throat]
things as well. Men sitting on top of
pillars, you know, a king, an incredibly
hierarchical system which abhored
democracy.
>> Um, so I think it's a way it's a way we
it's a route we could have taken.
Um, and it's the way they handled
things. immigration, inflation,
war, peace, diplomacy.
I think there are there are lessons
there for us.
>> Yeah. I think from the Vikings, the
lessons are a bit more poetic.
>> Yeah.
>> The lessons from the Byzantine Empire is
like quite literal like how to run a
government, how to run the law, how to
>> how to build a stable society. And
honestly, like you can count on the
fingers of one hand states that have
lasted a thousand years, right? Bzantium
and Venice, I think.
and Venice was an offshoot of the
Byzantines. Like that's a for a
government to last a thousand years is a
rare thing. Like we should be taking a
look at this.
>> Like how and how much of that is due to
Augustus. Can we give him any credit for
this? I mean he built the system.
>> Yeah. But there was a lot like you you
mentioned a lot of people along the way
from Constantine to Justinian the Basil.
There's so many emperors along the way
that revolutionized and then
restabilized the empire after it was
almost falling apart.
>> Yeah. You know what else too though?
Like what happens to a human when you
give that human
essentially absolute power? Cuz the
Byzantine emperor stood halfway to I
mean he was more autocratic than
anything other than I don't know the
pope that we you know we have in the
modern world.
What happens when you give someone that
level of power? Like I love Justinian,
but
I wouldn't have liked to know him, you
know? I wouldn't like to be one of his
subjects.
>> I love Basil the first, but man was a
bloodthirsty tyrant. Like I think it
shows you what happened. What is it?
Lord Actton abs paracrups and absolute
paracrups. Absolutely. Like that's quite
clear throughout Byzantine history. said
it's a long a long list
and uh
as technologies become more powerful
absolute power becomes potentially more
destructive. So yeah, it's more
absolute.
>> It's more absolute and it's uh I mean
this is the project for the 21st
century, the 20th and the 21st century.
This is post-industrial revolution, post
the computer technological
revolution, post nuclear weapons
discovery.
>> How do we construct societies that last
like the Byzantine Empire did a thousand
years? because it's like a new challenge
for us.
>> Yeah.
>> There there's going to be history books
written about us
>> because like nuclear weapons,
>> you know, 80 years ago, it's like Greek
fire that you can apply to the entirety
of human civilization.
Yeah. And so that there's going to be
good history books and I hope there's
going to be these stories about the
American Empire, about the rest that
sound similar to Byzantine Empire
um versus the Viking age. It only lasted
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> three centuries.
>> I mean, I suppose the good news is it
can be done, right? Or it has been done.
>> It has been done. What gives you hope
about the future? Having looked at the
deep history of us or gives you hope?
>> During grad school, I was reading um
Frederick Douglas's autobiography
and he said, "I could sit with Plato and
Cicero and they would not flinch."
You know, by which he meant that the
great conversation was for everyone, no
matter what your skin color, no matter
what your level of income, and even no
matter your intelligence, you know. And
I think that's actually what
that's why history comes alive for me is
because these are not alien people. Like
you you had asked
how similar are ancient people to us
psychologically
>> you know what their goals were for and I
think the short answer is they were
identical to us which is why we can
understand them. It's it's why you
should read things. It's why you should
read the meditations because this is not
just some dry whatever talking to
himself in a culture that you cannot
understand and can never recreate. It's
it's a human talking about being human,
you know, and I think human nature has
not changed and I don't think human
nature will change. Um, so we are flawed
and broken and
we that's that's the human condition. We
are going to be flawed and broken. Um,
so I don't think I actually think that's
the great
that's the great question of history. If
you want to understand history, you have
to know about human nature. What is our
human nature? If you think it's a blank
slate and we can kind of educate
ourselves to a utopia or, you know, like
the Marxists said, then okay, hasn't
really worked out, but okay. If you
believe we're basically bad,
there's a whole set of things that come
with that. If you believe we're
basically good, there's a whole set of
Right. So, you won't learn the
appropriate lesson if you misdiagnose
human nature.
>> Yeah. I think the diagnosis that you're
kind of hinting at is is seemingly the
most accurate one, which is we're
flawed,
a mix of good, a mix of evil, capacity
for both.
>> That's right. That's right. I mean, I I
have to teach my kids to be kind. I
don't have to teach my kids to be
unkind. I mean, one of those is natural
and one is not. I think my kids can
become kind. You know
>> the capacity
>> the capacity humans have the capacity
for for much great things
>> but not perfection
uh has to come outside of us.
>> Well what is it that uh line of um all
of us are in the gutter but some of us
are looking up at the stars.
>> Yeah. And so you got to teach as many of
us and
to look up at the stars and dream
because once once you allow yourself to
dream of a better world, you you try you
try like the Vikings did go out there.
Don't try not to murder your neighbor.
But if you do, all of us have, of
course,
>> if you do, there's Greenland. There's
Greenland.
>> There's Greenland. Thank you for
everything you've done for the world.
Thank you for the podcast you put out
there. Thank you for your incredible
books and thank you for the conversation
today.
>> Thank you. I really appreciate the
opportunity. Thanks a lot.
>> Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Lars Brownworth. To
support this podcast, please check out
our sponsors in the description where
you can also find links to contact me,
ask questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now, let me leave you with some
words from the Volanga Saga, a 13th
century Icelandic pros epic that tells
the story of the Valsunga clan. a
legendary Norse dynasty of heroes and
dragon slayers.
Fear not death, for the hour of your
doom is set, and none may escape it.
And another powerful quote from this
saga is, "Better to fight and fall than
to live without hope."
Thank you for listening and hope to see
you next time.